Release Notes 8.3 (#1149)
percona/psmdb-docs: docs/release_notes/8.3.7-1.md

authors:
    - Rasika Chivate
version: 8.3.4-1
---

# Percona Server for MongoDB {{ page.meta.version }} ({{date.8_3_4}}) 

[Installation](../install/index.md){.md-button}
[Upgrade](../install/upgrade-from-80.md){.md-button}

!!! warning "Technical Preview"
    Percona Server for MongoDB 8.3.4-1 is available as a technical preview.

    We recommend that early adopters use this feature for testing purposes only and not in production environments.

We are pleased to announce the new major version of Percona Server for MongoDB 8.3.4-1 – the drop-in replacement for MongoDB Community Edition. Percona Server for MongoDB supports MongoDB Community protocols and drivers and enhances it with the [enterprise-grade features for free](../comparison.md), enabling you to effectively meet the requirements of your organization in terms of high-availability, reliability and data security. 

This release of Percona Server for MongoDB includes the improvements and bug fixes of [MongoDB 8.3.4 Community Edition :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/8.3/#8.3.4---june-11--2026){:target="_blank"}.

## Upgrade considerations

> To upgrade to MongoDB 8.3 from an 8.0 deployment, the deployment must have `featureCompatibilityVersion` set to 8.0.

Reviewer: Maybe add the link to the upgrade guide?

Author: Its already there.

To check the version:

```javascript

> db.adminCommand( { getParameter: 1, featureCompatibilityVersion: 1 } )

Reviewer: Output will be welcome here, so that users see what to expect

SBOMs are distributed through the following channels:

- GitHub: The latest SBOM is placed in the root of the `percona/percona-server-mongodb` main branch.

- Binaries/Tarballs: An SBOM file is included in `doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json`

- Packages: For `.deb` and `.rpm` packages, the SBOM file is installed in a standard documentation directory such as `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json`.

- Docker: The SBOM is attached directly to the Docker image as metadata.

### Join Percona Squad

Participate in monthly SWAG raffles, get early access to new product features, and join invite-only "ask me anything" sessions with database performance experts. Interested? Fill in the form at [squad.percona.com/mongodb :octicons-link-external-16:](https://squad.percona.com/mongodb){:target="_blank"}.

### Upstream Improvements

MongoDB 8.3 introduces a lot of significant changes. We recommend testing it on staging environments before using it in production. 

The key upstream improvements include:

#### Query planning and aggregation

> The `$scoreFusion` aggregation stage is now generally available, and new expressions support hashing, Extended JSON conversion, binary subtypes, and `ObjectId` generation.

Reviewer: Was it tech preview before? In what version? What's the value of it?

Reviewer 2: it was Public Preview (term that upstream use). But we haven't released 8.3.x before - so at Percona we did not have that.

```

For detailed upgrade instructions, see [Upgrade from Percona Server for MongoDB 8.0](../install/upgrade-from-80.md).

## Release Highlights

### Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)

Percona Server for MongoDB (PSMDB) now provides Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) for every release. SBOMs improve software supply chain transparency by documenting the components and dependencies included in a build. They are generated automatically as part of the release pipeline in the industry standard [CycloneDX :octicons-link-external-16:](https://cyclonedx.org/specification/overview/){:target="_blank"} format.

SBOMs are distributed through the following channels:

- Tarballs: An SBOM is included in `doc/sbom.cdx.json` file.

- Packages: For `.deb` and `.rpm` packages, the SBOM file is installed in a standard documentation directory such as `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json`.

- Docker: The SBOM is attached directly to the Docker image as metadata.

For comprehensive information, refer to our [documentation](../sbom.md).

### Upstream improvements

The key upstream improvements include:

#### Aggregation and search

> - The `$scoreFusion` aggregation stage is now generally available (GA), and new expressions support hashing, Extended JSON conversion, binary subtypes, and `ObjectId` generation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `$scoreFusion` aggregation stage is now available, and new expressions support hashing, Extended JSON conversion, binary subtypes, and `ObjectId` generation.
```

- The `$map`,`$filter`, and `$reduce` expressions can access array element indexes. This release also expands conversions between BSON types, strings, arrays, objects, numeric values, and Extended JSON.

#### Monitoring and diagnostics
[Full-time diagnostic data capture (FTDC) :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/administration/full-time-diagnostic-data-capture/){:target="_blank"} collects connection pool statistics for `mongod`. The `serverStatus` output includes additional metrics for query planning, replication, TTL processing, search operations, and execution queues.

#### Resource management
Text search operations that process text score metadata have a 100 MB memory limit. When `allowDiskUse` is enabled, intermediate results can spill to disk. New controls also limit memory consumption from pre-authentication connections and improve retry behavior during high load.

#### Shard removal
The `removeShard` command is deprecated in favor of commands that provide more control over shard draining and removal. New commands let administrators start, stop, monitor, and complete shard draining as separate operations.

#### Indexes and time series collections

> MongoDB 8.3 introduces `2dsphere` index version 4 as the default and changes how geospatial indexes handle documents containing both `GeoJSON` and legacy coordinates. It also adds validation and naming restrictions for time series collections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`2dsphere` index version 4 is introduced as the default and changed how geospatial indexes handle documents containing both `GeoJSON` and legacy coordinates. It also adds validation and naming restrictions for time series collections.
```

* [PSMDB-2038](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-2038): Percona Server for MongoDB now exposes LDAP `userToDN` cache statistics through the `serverStatus` command. These metrics provide visibility into cache utilization and effectiveness, helping administrators troubleshoot LDAP authentication latency, validate cache behavior after configuration changes, and optimize cache sizing for their workloads. The new `ldap.userToDNCache` section reports runtime information such as cache usage, hits, misses, and invalidations, making LDAP authentication performance easier to monitor and tune.

## Tools packaged with this release

Percona Server for MongoDB packages the following MongoDB tools:

MongoDB Shell (mongosh): 2.9.2 — [upstream release notes :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongodb-shell/changelog/#v2.9.2){:target="_blank"}

> ### Join Percona Squad

Reviewer 2: Please remove this section - we no longer have this program active

Author: Ok.

#### Monitoring and diagnostics
FTDC collects connection pool statistics for `mongod`. The `serverStatus` output includes additional metrics for query planning, replication, TTL processing, search operations, and execution queues.

#### Resource management
Text search operations that process text score metadata have a 100 MB memory limit. When `allowDiskUse` is enabled, intermediate results can spill to disk. New controls also limit memory consumption from pre-authentication connections and improve retry behavior during high load.

#### Shard removal
The `removeShard` command is deprecated in favor of commands that provide more control over shard draining and removal. New commands let administrators start, stop, monitor, and complete shard draining as separate operations.

#### Indexes and time series collections
MongoDB 8.3 introduces `2dsphere` index version 4 as the default and changes how geospatial indexes handle documents containing both GeoJSON and legacy coordinates. It also adds validation and naming restrictions for time series collections.

#### Security

> Starting with MongoDB 8.3, you cannot include SCRAM-SHA-1 for `authenticationMechanisms` while also specifying `mongod --tlsFIPSMode` or `mongos --tlsFIPSMode`.

Reviewer 2: That change is only in the upstream and not included for this release of Percona Server for MongoDB - please remove.

Author: Removed

- [SERVER-128584](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/SERVER-128584){:target="_blank"} ([CVE-2026-13076 :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2026-13076){:target="_blank"}): Fixed an issue where converting `BinData` to an array with `$convert` could consume excessive memory. An authenticated user with write access and permission to run aggregation queries could trigger the issue, causing the operating system to terminate `mongod` and resulting in a denial-of-service.

- [SERVER-79980](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/SERVER-79980){:target="_blank"} ([CVE-2026-13076 :octicons-link-external-16:](https://www.cve.org/CVERecord?id=CVE-2026-13076){:target="_blank"}):

> 

Author: Fixed
